# Why “Normal” is Overrated & How HSP Can Change the World – If They Do This
 
“I just wish I could be normal.” That sentiment is something I have said to myself and something I have heard from my clients more times than I can count.
 
The unfortunate truth is, many highly sensitive people (HSP) struggle with their trait and tendencies; they struggle with how different they perceive themselves to be from those around them. Most of us feel such resentment, embarrassment, and frustration with our high sensitivity.
 
Being a HSP has been downright frustrating, exhausting, and the bane of my existence at times. My near-constantly thinking brain, my sensitive senses (seriously, other people can’t smell that or aren’t annoyed by the brightness of those lights?!), the way I can cry all too easily when overwhelmed by emotion (any emotion – I am an equal cry opportunist). For the first part of my life, I did all I could to numb myself with alcohol and swinging between periods of over- and under-eating.
 
I have tried to “fix” it, “heal” it, “overcome” it, “outsmart” it, and that led me straight into the depths of depression, anxiety, burnout, hiding, and the worst and most heavy of all: buried under a mountain of shame. What’s wrong with me? Why can’t I just be normal? Why can’t I just fit in? Why do crowds, loud noises, bright lights, certain textures, the emotions of others, violent or scary movies/shows, too much movement/travel, a deviation in my routine, answering an unexpected phone call or knock on the door throw me so much more easily than they do others? How am I supposed to be “successful,” “make money,” “take care of myself” in a world where I don’t feel I belong, that doesn’t feel safe, supportive, or that is even welcoming of me?!
 
Yup, many times I’ve believed that this highly sensitive system has sucked.
 
Eventually, I realized that “normal” is a sham… it’s an illusion, and an underrated one at that. I eventually realized, in a truly life-changing revelation, that it was my relationship with my high sensitivity and the shame I associated with it that was actually the root of my challenges, as opposed to the high sensitivity itself.
 
Yes, while being in such a small segment of the population can lead to us feeling isolated and weird, it’s living in a highly sensitive system in a world that’s not designed to support it and the story and meaning about ourselves we create about those challenges.
 
Rather than the traits and unique differences of high sensitivity compared to other non-HSP, it's the resentment, the frustration, the internalizing of it all. It’s the shame.  
 
Shame is something many of us have a hard time working with, and something about which many of us are misinformed.

At its core, shame is a necessary, positive state that motivates us to create change. It arises when we believe our sense of safety, belonging, contentment, and/or joy are in jeopardy.

We catalog occurrences of shame over our lives and file them away so that we then know how and when to act in ways that’ll secure safety, belonging, contentment, and/or joy in a variety of situations. I’ve coined this our “shame bundle” and this internal filing cabinet then guides our behaviors, choices, self-identity, etc.

When unchecked, however, and when we aren’t taught how to create safety, belonging, contentment, and joy from within, we internalize these instances and define ourselves against them.
 
Couple that with possessing a trait that is so rare, a trait that is different from others and that isn’t meant to optimally thrive in our current mainstream culture, a trait that requires we do things quite different from the “norm,” speak up for ourselves to honor the needs and boundaries of our highly sensitive systems, allow ourselves to be seen while doing so and essentially outing our weirdness throughout our lives OR suffering the consequences of NOT doing so which leads to frequent episodes of physical, emotional, and mental health decline, it’s as though we feel we can’t “win” and shame piles on and on and on as we definitely perceive our sense of safety, belonging, contentment, and/or joy to be in jeopardy because of our inability to just be “normal.”



We feel we must overcompensate then and so we give into those all-too-common traits and tendencies I’ve seen in myself and in my clients: people-pleasing, self-loathing, anxiety, self-sabotage, overthinking, overdoing, and eventually burnout.
 
Growing up, most adults didn’t know how to best deal with us at home or at school, and so we certainly never learned how to best deal or cope with our unique traits and needs.
 
The sooner we may develop a system, a solid foundation for ourselves for how best to care for ourselves physically, emotionally, mentally, and spiritually, the sooner we can unravel the shame associated with ourselves, our high sensitivity, and the sooner we are able to recognize the true gifts, strengths, and abilities our high sensitivity offers us that we then get to offer the world – a world that really, really needs it.
 
When we internalize episodes of shame to mean something about us personally, it makes it all so much heavier – the challenges of being a HSP in our modern world plus the meaning we’ve made about it equals greater challenge and suffering than we can navigate and cue burnout, overwhelm, anxiety, people-pleasing, self-sabotage, etc.
 
We falsely believe that shame tells us to stay small, hidden, not ruffle feathers, and not be seen in our burdensome weirdness as highly sensitive people.
 
What shame really wants to show us is how we can best secure a sense of safety, belonging, contentment, and joy from within ourselves, using our high sensitivity as a guide.
 
What shame really wants to show us is how we can be motivated to create meaningful change in our lives and in the world. Shame is beckoning us to see how times or instances of challenge are actually gateways towards more safety, belonging, contentment, and joy – if we’re able to see them as such.
 
If we’re able to let shame be the positive influence in our lives it’s here to be, it has the potential to bring tremendous wholeness to our lives. As we create more confidence within ourselves, we’re able to trust our high sensitivity, be seen in it, and be celebrated for it!
 
Our current perception of and relationship with shame is doing us no favors. It’s time to recognize it, see it for what it actually is (rather than the meaning and story we’ve created around it), and embrace our high sensitivity as the gift it is in our lives and the potential it has to bring healing to the collective as a whole.
